1. WHAT THIS LECTURE COVERS
  - One more ingredient gets added to the fruit stand, and the
    straight line from Lecture 1 becomes a flat surface. That is
    the whole lecture: what happens to a linear equation when it
    has three variables instead of two.
  - Same rules as before. Fixed budget, spend all of it,
    fractional items allowed. The professor calls the new
    scenario "example two, a grocery store."
  - The payoff (added): a linear equation with two unknowns
    draws a line. With three unknowns it draws a plane. With
    more, it draws something you cannot picture but can still
    compute with, and every slice of it you can picture is
    still a line. That last sentence is the one to keep.

2. THE GROCERY STORE SCENARIO
  - The store sells apples at $2 each, oranges at $3 each, and
    now a loaf of bread at $5 per loaf. Same $30 budget, must be
    spent entirely, fractional groceries allowed.
  - His description: "just a slight complication." Three
    variables instead of two.
  - The equation: $30 total budget equals the number of apples
    times two, plus the number of oranges times three, plus the
    number of bread loaves times five. In the terse notation
    from Lecture 1, 30 = 2.apples + 3.oranges + 5.bread.
  - It still fits the general linear form (added): one a_i.x_i
    term per item, three items, three terms, added up.

3. SOLVING FOR ONE VARIABLE AGAIN
  - Just as in the fruit stand, he wants oranges as a function
    of the other items. Same tool: manipulate both sides of the
    equation the same way.
  - His steps, as he describes them: subtract 30 and 3.oranges
    from both sides, then divide both sides by minus three. That
    isolates oranges on one side and every other variable on the
    other. He says to check his work yourself.
  - The result he lands on: an equation for the number of
    oranges depending on both the number of apples and the
    number of bread loaves.
  - What that equation looks like (added): oranges = 10 -
    2/3.apples - 5/3.bread. The 10 is 30/3. The 2/3 is the apple
    price over the orange price. The 5/3 is the bread price over
    the orange price. Each other item shows up as its own
    exchange rate against oranges, same idea as the slope in
    Lecture 1, now with two of them.
  - Why divide by minus three (added): after subtracting 30 and
    3.oranges from both sides, the oranges term is on the left
    as -3.oranges and everything else is on the right. Dividing
    by -3 flips every sign on the right and leaves oranges alone
    with a coefficient of 1. Subtract 2.apples instead and
    divide by positive 3 and you get the same answer by a
    different road. Both are legal because both sides get the
    same treatment.
  - Example (added): a coffee cart sells bagels at $3, coffees
    at $4, and muffins at $2. You have $24 and must spend it
    all. The equation is 24 = 3.bagels + 4.coffees + 2.muffins.
    Solve for coffees with the professor's road:
    - Subtract 24 and 4.coffees from both sides:
      -4.coffees = 3.bagels + 2.muffins - 24.
    - Divide both sides by -4:
      coffees = 6 - 3/4.bagels - 1/2.muffins.
    - Check with 2 bagels and 4 muffins: 6 - 1.5 - 2 = 2.5
      coffees. Cost: 2 bagels is $6, 4 muffins is $8, 2.5 coffees
      is $10. Total $24.
    - Check the corners: no bagels and no muffins means 6
      coffees. 8 bagels alone means 0 coffees ($24 of bagels).
      12 muffins alone means 0 coffees ($24 of muffins).

4. STILL A LINEAR EQUATION
  - He is explicit that the rearranged equation is still a
    linear equation even though it does not look like a plain
    straight line. It fits the general form: an a times an x,
    then another a times another x. One pair for apples and
    their cost, one pair for bread and their cost.
  - The number of oranges is now shaped by both the number of
    apples and the number of bread loaves. Both have to be
    accounted for.
  - Small aside from the recording: he notes his slide colors
    apples orange when it "really should be red." Cosmetic, not
    math.
  - How many solutions? Infinitely many again, for the same two
    reasons: fractional items are allowed and the full budget
    must be spent.
  - Why still infinite, and more so (added): in Lecture 1 you
    picked one number (apples) and the equation handed back the
    other. Now you pick two numbers freely (apples and bread)
    and the equation hands back the third. Two free choices
    instead of one. The solution set went from a line's worth of
    points to a surface's worth.

5. VISUALIZING THREE VARIABLES: THE PLANE
  - Two variables plotted as apples against oranges gave a
    straight line. Three variables need a third axis, the number
    of bread loaves. Plotting the equation on those three axes
    gives a plane, a flat surface, instead of a line.
  - See the rotating 3D surface in Lecture 2 (notebook section
    "Example 2: A Grocery Store," the plot_surface widget with
    the two angle sliders). He rotates it so you can get a sense
    of the flat surface in three dimensions.
  - KEY TERM: plane: the flat surface you get when a linear
    equation in three variables is plotted on three axes (added
    definition). Flat means no bumps, no curvature. Any straight
    line drawn between two points on it stays on it.
  - Why flat (added): same reason the two-variable version was
    straight. Every variable appears once, multiplied by a
    plain number, so moving one step in apples always changes
    oranges by the same amount (2/3 fewer) no matter where you
    stand on the surface. A surface where the tilt never changes
    is a flat one.

6. THE PLANE VIEWED EDGE-ON IS A LINE
  - His key move: view the plane from the right angle and it
    almost looks like a line. His slide hint for the viewing
    angle was "40 and minus three." From that angle you see the
    linear relationship between two of the variables.
  - The line he points at is the relationship between bread
    loaves and oranges: change the number of bread loaves and
    the number of oranges must change to respect the budget.
  - His framing: imagine fixing the number of apples and looking
    only at bread loaves versus oranges. That is what you are
    seeing when you view the flat surface from that angle.
  - The practical version (added): fix one variable and the
    three-variable equation collapses to a two-variable one, and
    two-variable linear equations are lines. This is the move
    you will make constantly. Hold everything else steady, vary
    one thing, read the slope.
  - Example (added): the coffee cart, coffees = 6 - 3/4.bagels -
    1/2.muffins. Fix bagels at 2. Then coffees = 4.5 -
    1/2.muffins. That is y = b + m.x with intercept 4.5 and
    slope -1/2. Every muffin costs half a coffee. Fix bagels at
    4 instead and the intercept drops to 3 but the slope stays
    -1/2. Changing the fixed variable slides the line up or
    down. It never tilts it. That is the flatness of the plane
    showing up in the algebra.
  - Code (added): a slice of the plane is one line of NumPy.
      import numpy as np
      mf = np.linspace(0,9,10) ## muffin counts
      bg = 2 ## fix bagels
      print(6-0.75*bg-0.5*mf) ## coffees along the slice

7. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Adding a third item adds a third variable and a third
    a_i.x_i term. The equation is still linear.
  - Solving for one variable works the same way: do the same
    thing to both sides until the variable stands alone.
  - Each remaining variable shows up with its own slope, its
    price divided by the solved-for item's price.
  - Infinitely many solutions again, now two free choices deep.
  - Three variables plot as a plane, a flat surface, on three
    axes.
  - View the plane from the right angle, or fix one variable,
    and you are back to a line. Linear relationships between
    pairs of variables live inside the plane.

8. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Grocery store items: apples $2, oranges $3, bread $5 per
    loaf. Budget $30, spend all of it, fractional items allowed.
  - Equation: 30 = 2.apples + 3.oranges + 5.bread.
  - The professor's rearrangement steps: subtract 30 and
    3.oranges from both sides, then divide both sides by minus
    three.
  - Oranges depend on both apples and bread.
  - It is still a linear equation because it fits the general
    form, an a times an x plus another a times another x.
  - Infinitely many solutions because of fractional items and
    the full-budget rule.
  - Three variables plot as a plane (a flat surface), not a
    line. The third axis is bread loaves.
  - Viewed from the right angle, the plane shows a line: the
    linear relationship between two of the variables with the
    third held fixed.
