1. WHAT THIS LECTURE COVERS
  - The professor's goal: simplify the tools used to represent
    relationships between variables. The tool is the vector, and
    he says that once vectors show up, "we're really starting to
    talk about linear algebra in its most typical fashion."
  - Four things get introduced: what a vector is (an ordered
    list, drawn as an arrow), adding a number to a vector,
    adding and subtracting two vectors, and scaling a vector by
    a number.
  - Practical framing (added): a vector is an array. If you have
    used a Python list, a NumPy array, or a column of a
    spreadsheet, you have used one. The math adds two things the
    array does not have on its own: a picture (the arrow) and a
    fixed set of rules for combining arrays.

2. WHY VECTORS: GROUPING INFORMATION BY TYPE
  - The grocery equation 30 = 2.apples + 3.oranges + 5.bread
    carries three kinds of information: the total budget on the
    left, the number of each grocery item (the variables), and
    the price of each item (the numbers multiplying them).
  - His alternative to one long equation: group the information
    by type. Separate the item counts from the item costs.
    Vectors are the way to do that, and they let you represent
    the information "as points in a high dimensional space."
  - The motivation he gives for the prices: they have been
    treated as fixed, but prices change. You want a flexible
    representation of the cost information so you can update it
    later.
  - Why this matters in practice (added): a single equation
    hard-codes the prices into the formula. A separate cost
    vector is a parameter you can swap without rewriting the
    model. Every later operation in this module (dot products,
    matrix products) is built on exactly this separation of
    "the data" from "the rule."

3. THE COST VECTOR
  - Encode the prices as an ordered list: the first component is
    the cost of apples ($2), the second is the cost of oranges
    ($3), the third is the cost of bread ($5).
  - KEY TERM: vector: an ordered list of numbers. The professor
    writes it as a column of numbers with a small arrow over the
    letter (c with an arrow) to say "this c is not a number, it
    is a vector."
  - KEY TERM: component: one entry in the vector, identified by
    its position (added definition). "First component" means the
    first number in the list. The order is part of the meaning:
    swap two components and you have a different vector.
  - The fruit stand cost vector, with bread ignored, has just
    two components: cost of apples, cost of oranges.
  - His geometric reading: a two-component vector is a specific
    point in two-dimensional space. Not the usual x-y plane but
    the apple-orange cost plane. It is common to draw the vector
    not as a point but as an arrow to that point.
  - Example (added): a coffee cart sells bagels at $3, coffees
    at $4, and muffins at $2. Its cost vector is c = (3, 4, 2).
    Drop muffins and the cart's two-item cost vector is (3, 4),
    a point three units along the bagel-cost axis and four up
    the coffee-cost axis.

4. VECTORS AS ARROWS FROM THE ORIGIN
  - He returns to the apples-versus-oranges line plot from
    Lecture 1 and draws the current (apples, oranges) pair as a
    vector "emanating from zero zero, from the origin," ending
    at the point on the line. Change the number of apples and
    the arrow swings to follow the point. See the widget in
    Lecture 3 (notebook section "What are Vectors?", the
    visualize function with the plotVector arrow).
  - KEY TERM: origin: the point where every coordinate is zero.
    (0, 0) in two dimensions, (0, 0, 0) in three (added
    definition). Every arrow in this lecture starts there.
  - Three dimensions works the same way. The grocery example has
    apples, oranges, and bread, so the arrow leaves (0, 0, 0)
    and ends at the point with those three coordinates. He walks
    the three sliders: change apples and the vector moves along
    the apple axis, change oranges and it moves along the orange
    axis, change bread and it moves up and down the third axis.
    See the 3D widget in the same notebook section (the
    plot_vector function with apples, oranges, bread sliders).
  - The arrow is a convention, not a fact (added): the vector is
    the list of numbers. The arrow is how you draw it. Any time
    a picture in this module gets confusing, go back to the
    list. The list is always right.

5. ADDING A NUMBER TO A VECTOR
  - His scenario: the grocery raises every price by $1. Write a
    second vector, c2, equal to the cost vector plus one.
  - The rule: add the number to every component. In the fruit
    stand case, 2 + 1 is 3 and 3 + 1 is 4, so c2 = (3, 4). Every
    component went up by one.
  - His demo: add nothing and you get the starting vector back
    (c2 equals c). Add more and more and the new vector moves
    further away along both the x axis and the y axis. See the
    add_to_vector widget in the Lecture 3 notebook section.
  - Example (added): the coffee cart's cost vector c = (3, 4, 2)
    after a $1 hike on everything is c + 1 = (4, 5, 3). Each of
    the three prices moved by the same $1. The arrow's tip moved
    one unit along every axis at once.
  - What this does to the picture (added): adding the same
    number to every component slides the arrow's tip diagonally,
    one unit per axis. It is not the same as making the arrow
    longer along its own direction. That operation is scaling,
    section 8.

6. ADDING TWO VECTORS
  - He switches to two generic vectors that "don't necessarily
    represent anything": a = (2, 3) and b = (1, 2).
  - KEY TERM: componentwise: done one position at a time. The
    first components combine with each other, the second
    components combine with each other, and so on (added
    definition).
  - Vector addition is componentwise. a + b has first component
    2 + 1 = 3 and second component 3 + 2 = 5. Result (3, 5), a
    new vector of the same size.
  - The two vectors must be the same length for this to make
    sense (added): there is no second component of b to pair
    with the second component of a otherwise. NumPy will
    complain, and it is right to.
  - The picture, in his words: take a copy of b, same angle and
    same length, and attach its tail to the endpoint of a. Where
    the copy ends is the endpoint of a + b. His demo draws that
    "ghost copy" of b. Change b's length or angle and the ghost
    changes with it, but sticking it on the end of a always
    lands on a + b. See the addVectors widget in the Lecture 3
    notebook (sliders for each vector's angle and norm).
  - Example (added): a = (1, 4) and b = (3, 2).
    - First components: 1 + 3 = 4.
    - Second components: 4 + 2 = 6.
    - a + b = (4, 6). Start at the origin, go to (1, 4), then
      walk 3 right and 2 up. You arrive at (4, 6).
  - Practical reading (added): vector addition is "and then."
    Position plus displacement. This week's sales plus next
    week's sales. Two forces on one object. Anything where two
    lists of matching quantities combine position by position.

7. SUBTRACTING TWO VECTORS
  - Subtraction is componentwise too, "exactly the same" in his
    words. a - b subtracts the first component of b from the
    first component of a, the second from the second, and so
    on. For a = (2, 3) and b = (1, 2): 2 - 1 is 1 and 3 - 2 is
    1. Result (1, 1).
  - The picture: still a ghost copy of b, but instead of
    attaching its tail to the end of a, you attach its head to
    the end of a and walk backwards along it. Where you end up
    is a - b. See the subtractVectors widget in the Lecture 3
    notebook.
  - His summary line for both operations: adding and
    subtracting vectors is like taking a copy of one vector and
    sticking it on the endpoint of the other.
  - Example (added): a = (1, 4) and b = (3, 2).
    - a - b = (1 - 3, 4 - 2) = (-2, 2).
    - b - a = (3 - 1, 2 - 4) = (2, -2). Order matters, just as
      with numbers. Reversing it flips every sign.
    - Negative components are fine. (-2, 2) is an arrow pointing
      up and to the left.
  - Practical reading (added): a - b is "how do I get from b to
    a." Difference between two positions, change between two
    readings, the error between a prediction and an actual.
    Subtraction is the operation you reach for whenever the
    question is "what changed."

8. SCALING A VECTOR BY A SCALAR
  - New vector g represents the other kind of grocery
    information, the number of each item purchased. His example
    is g = (4, 2, 3): 4 apples, 2 oranges, 3 loaves of bread.
  - Triple the purchase of every item: the new vector g2 equals
    3 times g. Computed componentwise: 4 times 3 is 12, 2 times
    3 is 6, 3 times 3 is 9. g2 = (12, 6, 9). Every component was
    multiplied by 3.
  - KEY TERM: scalar: a plain number that multiplies a vector.
    The professor prefers to say the vector was "scaled by a
    scalar equal to 3" instead of "multiplied by 3."
  - KEY TERM: scaling: multiplying every component of a vector
    by the same scalar (added definition).
  - Why the careful wording: he warns that "multiplication has
    contextually dependent meaning" once vectors and the other
    objects of linear algebra are involved. Lecture 5 introduces
    two different vector "multiplications," so scalar
    multiplication gets its own name now to avoid the collision.
  - The picture: scaling g by 3 is like taking two extra copies
    of g and sticking them end to end on g. The new endpoint is
    3 times g. Same angle, three times the length. See the
    two-panel plot and the scale_vector widget in the Lecture 3
    notebook.
  - Three cases he walks through with the slider:
    - Positive scalar greater than 1: the vector lengthens along
      the same angle.
    - Scalar less than 1: the vector shrinks.
    - Negative scalar: the vector follows the same line but
      points the opposite direction.
    The angle relative to the axes never changes. Only the
    length and, for negatives, the direction.
  - Example (added): coffee cart order g = (2, 1, 4), meaning 2
    bagels, 1 coffee, 4 muffins.
    - Double it: 2.g = (4, 2, 8).
    - Halve it: 0.5.g = (1, 0.5, 2). Half a coffee is legal
      here, the professor allowed fractional items in Lecture 1.
    - Negate it: -1.g = (-2, -1, -4). Same line through the
      origin, opposite direction. A negative order makes no
      sense at a cart, but the geometry does not care.
  - Code (added): every operation in this lecture is one line
    once the vectors are NumPy arrays.
      import numpy as np
      c,g = np.array([3,4,2]),np.array([2,1,4]) ## costs, order
      print(c+1) ## [4 5 3], price hike
      print(2*g, -1*g) ## [4 2 8] [-2 -1 -4], scaled
      a,b = np.array([1,4]),np.array([3,2]) ## two generic vectors
      print(a+b, a-b) ## [4 6] [-2  2]

9. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - A vector is an ordered list of numbers, drawn as an arrow
    from the origin to the point the list names. The arrow over
    the letter marks it as a vector, not a number.
  - Vectors separate the kinds of information in an equation:
    a cost vector for prices, a count vector for quantities.
  - Adding a number to a vector adds it to every component.
  - Adding or subtracting two vectors is componentwise, and the
    vectors must be the same length. The picture is a copy of
    one vector attached to the tip of the other.
  - Scaling a vector by a scalar multiplies every component.
    Positive scalars stretch or shrink along the same angle,
    negative scalars flip the direction.
  - Say "scaled by a scalar," not "multiplied," because
    multiplication will mean other things soon.

10. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - The grocery equation carries three kinds of information:
    total budget, number of each item, price of each item.
  - Vectors represent information as points in a
    high-dimensional space.
  - The cost vector c (arrow on top) for the grocery example is
    (2, 3, 5): apples, oranges, bread, in that order. For the
    fruit stand it is (2, 3).
  - Vectors are drawn as arrows emanating from the origin
    (0, 0) or (0, 0, 0).
  - Adding $1 to every price: c2 = c + 1 = (3, 4). Each
    component increased by one.
  - a = (2, 3) and b = (1, 2): a + b = (3, 5), a - b = (1, 1).
    Both are componentwise.
  - Adding: attach a copy of b (same angle, same length) to the
    endpoint of a. Subtracting: attach the copy's endpoint and
    walk backwards.
  - g = (4, 2, 3) is 4 apples, 2 oranges, 3 loaves. Tripled,
    3.g = (12, 6, 9).
  - A number multiplying a vector is called a scalar, and the
    operation is called scaling.
  - Scaling by a positive scalar keeps the angle and changes the
    length. A scalar below 1 shrinks it. A negative scalar
    points it the opposite way along the same line.
  - Multiplication has contextually dependent meaning in linear
    algebra.
