1. WHAT THIS LECTURE COVERS
  - The reason for three lectures of eigenvector work: eigenvectors
    find redundant information in a big dataset, and redundant
    information can be thrown away. That is compression.
  - The demonstration is eigenfaces: a photo of a face stored as a
    matrix, squeezed down to a much smaller matrix with principal
    component analysis, then rebuilt.
  - Scope, in the professor's own words: this section is just an
    example. It probably will not be covered on homeworks or on the
    final exam, and a future machine learning course covers it in
    greater detail.

2. WHY BOTHER
  - Eigenvectors represent a convenient way to cluster large
    datasets by identifying redundant information.
  - If you can identify redundant information in a large dataset,
    you can possibly compress the amount of space needed to store
    that data.
  - Where you will see it next: principal component analysis, in
    the machine learning course. Eigenvectors and eigenvalues
    emerge naturally there.
  - Practical framing (added): if two columns of your data always
    move together, you are paying to store the same fact twice.
    Eigenvectors find the directions where the data really
    varies, and the eigenvalues rank those directions by how much
    variation lives along each one. Keep the big ones, drop the
    rest, and most of the picture survives.

3. THE DATASET: A FACE AS A MATRIX
  - The example dataset is an image, a black and white photo of
    former US President George W. Bush, represented as a
    rectangular matrix of real values.
  - KEY TERM: scikit-learn (sklearn): a very useful Python package
    for machine learning. It also ships a set of standardized
    datasets that people use as teaching examples and as benchmarks
    when comparing one algorithm against another.
  - One of those datasets is a collection of famous people's faces.
    The Bush image comes from it.
  - The image object is just a matrix: 62 rows by 47 columns, each
    number between zero and one, telling imshow how black or how
    white that cell should be. It is drawn with a color map called
    bone. See the face and the printed matrix in the Lecture 11
    notebook section "Example Eigenfaces and Data Compression".
  - Tie back to Lecture 7 (added): the flower was a 3-layer tensor
    because it was in color. A grayscale image needs only one layer,
    so it is a plain two dimensional matrix, and every matrix trick
    from this module applies to it directly.

4. WHAT PCA DOES
  - KEY TERM: principal component analysis (PCA): an algorithm that
    uses a matrix's eigenvectors to capture its prevailing patterns
    and compress it into a smaller matrix. Not vital to understand
    in full for this course.
  - The lecture's step by step:
      1. Hand PCA a matrix of data. It need not be square. Lots of
         rows and few columns is common.
      2. PCA looks at every pair of columns and asks how correlated
         they are. From those pairwise correlations it builds a
         square matrix. The lecture calls this the covariance
         matrix.
      3. Compute that square matrix's eigenvectors and eigenvalues.
      4. The eigenvectors with the largest eigenvalues identify the
         dimensions along which most of the information in the
         dataset is occurring.
      5. Keep some number of those top eigenvectors and throw out
         the rest, projecting the big matrix down to a smaller one
         with fewer dimensions.
  - KEY TERM: correlation: how strongly two columns move together
    (added definition, the lecture defers the full definition to a
    later class).
  - The notebook's markdown adds a few facts the recording only
    gestures at: the axes PCA finds are the eigenvectors, they are
    orthogonal to each other, each eigenvalue is the amount of
    variance along its eigenvector, and the eigenvector with the
    highest eigenvalue is the first principal component, the
    second highest is the second, and so on.
  - Why the covariance matrix is square and symmetric (added):
    one row and one column per data column, and the entry for
    columns i and j is the same as for j and i. That symmetry is
    exactly the Lecture 8 condition, which is why the eigenvectors
    come out perpendicular and form a clean new coordinate system,
    the eigenspace, for the data.

5. COMPRESS DOWN, PROJECT BACK UP
  - The demo has a slider for the number of eigenvectors. The
    original image is 62 by 47. Using n eigenvectors projects it
    down to a matrix that is 62 by n.
  - With just the first two eigenvectors, the result is 62 by 2,
    which the lecture reports as about 4 percent of the size of the
    original matrix. A very big compression, and a ton of data
    thrown out.
  - The small matrix plus the PCA algorithm can then be projected
    back up to the 62 by 47 space. Some information is lost on the
    way.
  - What the two-eigenvector rebuild looks like: pretty blurry, not
    a whole lot like the original face, but with recognizable
    elements. Dark blobs roughly where the eyes go, a vertical
    stripe where the nose should be, dark blobs for nostrils, a
    horizontal line for the mouth. What gets recovered is the major
    patterns in the image. See the side by side original and
    compressed images under the slider in the Lecture 11 notebook.
  - The code shape in the notebook (added, the lecture runs it
    without narrating it):
      from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
      pca = PCA(n_components=n) ## keep n eigenvectors
      small = pca.fit(bush).transform(bush) ## 62 by n
      rebuilt = pca.inverse_transform(small) ## back to 62 by 47
    fit finds the eigenvectors, transform projects down, and
    inverse_transform projects back up.

6. HOW MUCH IS LOST
  - Slide the count up. With three, four, or five eigenvectors the
    compressed image looks more and more like the original face.
  - Around 10 to 15 eigenvectors the images are pretty close to the
    original, at least to the human eye.
  - The lecture's closing setting: 14 eigenvectors, the 14
    corresponding to the 14 largest eigenvalues of the covariance
    matrix. That projects 62 by 47 down to 62 by 14, about 30
    percent as much data as the start. Still a really big
    reduction, and the rebuilt face is visibly pretty similar.
  - The arithmetic behind the percentages (added): the compressed
    matrix keeps all 62 rows and n of the 47 columns, so the ratio
    is n over 47. Two over 47 is about 4 percent. Fourteen over 47
    is about 30 percent. The number of rows cancels out.
  - Rule of thumb (added): eigenvalues usually drop off fast. The
    first few carry most of the variance, the tail carries noise
    and fine detail. The slider is a dial between file size and
    blur, and the eigenvalues tell you where the dial stops paying
    off.

7. A SMALL VERSION YOU CAN RUN (added)
  - The whole pipeline in NumPy on a matrix small enough to read,
    using only functions from this module. Six readings from three
    sensors on the same machine, where sensor two reads about one
    degree above sensor one and sensor three reads about double.
    Three columns, but really one piece of information.
      import numpy as np
      X = np.array([[10,11,21],[12,13,24],[11,12,22],[14,16,28],[13,14,27],[15,16,30]],float)
      Xc = X-X.mean(axis=0) ## center each column on its mean
      vals,vecs = np.linalg.eig(np.dot(Xc.T,Xc)/(len(X)-1)) ## covariance, then eigen
      w = vecs[:,[np.argmax(vals)]] ## keep the top eigenvector only
      Xhat = np.dot(np.dot(Xc,w),w.T)+X.mean(axis=0) ## down to 6 by 1, back to 6 by 3
      print(np.sort(vals)[::-1].round(2), np.abs(Xhat-X).max().round(2))
  - What comes out:
      eigenvalues, largest first: 20.21, 0.19, 0.03
      share of total variance:    98.9%, 0.9%, 0.1%
      biggest rebuild error with one eigenvector: 0.62
      biggest rebuild error with two eigenvectors: 0.15
  - Reading it: one eigenvector carries 98.9 percent of the
    variation in three columns. Keeping it stores 6 numbers instead
    of 18, a third of the space, and the rebuilt readings are
    within 0.62 of the originals everywhere. That is the face demo
    with numbers you can check by hand.
  - The covariance matrix here is 3 by 3 and symmetric, so its
    three eigenvectors are perpendicular, per Lecture 8. The
    largest eigenvalue's eigenvector is the direction all three
    sensors move together. The other two are the tiny
    disagreements between them.

8. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Eigenvectors find redundant information. Redundant information
    can be dropped, which is compression.
  - A grayscale image is a plain matrix. The example face is 62 by
    47 with values from zero to one.
  - PCA builds a square covariance matrix from the column-pair
    correlations, takes its eigenvectors and eigenvalues, and keeps
    the eigenvectors with the largest eigenvalues.
  - Keeping n eigenvectors projects 62 by 47 down to 62 by n. Two
    gives about 4 percent of the data and a blurry face. Fourteen
    gives about 30 percent and a face that looks right.
  - Projecting back up always loses something. The eigenvalues say
    how much.

9. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - The professor states this section probably will not be on
    homeworks or the final exam and belongs to a future machine
    learning course.
  - Eigenvectors cluster large datasets by identifying redundant
    information, which allows compression.
  - The example image is former US President George W. Bush from a
    scikit-learn (sklearn) faces dataset.
  - sklearn is a Python package for machine learning that also
    provides standardized datasets used for teaching and
    benchmarking.
  - The image is a 62 by 47 matrix of numbers between zero and one,
    drawn with imshow and the color map bone.
  - PCA: correlation between every pair of columns forms a square
    matrix (the covariance matrix), whose eigenvectors and
    eigenvalues are computed. The eigenvectors with the largest
    eigenvalues identify where most of the information occurs.
  - Two eigenvectors project 62 by 47 down to 62 by 2, about 4
    percent of the original size.
  - Fourteen eigenvectors give 62 by 14, about 30 percent of the
    original data.
  - Around 10 to 15 eigenvectors the rebuilt image is pretty close
    to the original to the human eye.
  - Projecting back up to 62 by 47 loses some information. The two
    eigenvector rebuild is blurry with dark blobs for eyes, a
    vertical stripe for the nose, blobs for nostrils, and a
    horizontal line for the mouth.
