1. WHAT THIS LECTURE COVERS
  - A second way to think about vectors. Lecture 3 treated them
    as ordered lists that keep equations short and information
    sorted. This lecture borrows the physicist's definition: a
    vector is anything with a direction and a length.
  - Two things get introduced on the back of that: the norm (a
    vector's length as a single number) and where the norm
    formula comes from (the Pythagorean theorem).
  - Why the second view matters (added): the list view tells you
    how to store a vector and how to add or scale it. The
    direction-and-length view tells you what it means. Both are
    the same object. The norm is the bridge, because it turns a
    list of components into the one number a physicist would
    call "how far."

2. THE PHYSICIST'S DEFINITION
  - His statement: physicists love vectors and linear algebra
    because they provide a concise way to encode
    high-dimensional information in one abstraction.
  - His illustration: a spaceship moving through three
    dimensions and through time. Its current location and its
    current velocity can be encoded as a single vector instead
    of tracking the three-dimensional positions and the speed
    separately as you go.
  - KEY TERM: vector (physics): anything that has a direction
    and a length.
  - What "one abstraction" buys you (added): a single variable
    name for a bundle of numbers, and a single set of rules for
    manipulating the bundle. Update the position? Add a vector.
    Double the speed? Scale a vector. The bookkeeping of "which
    coordinate am I on" disappears into the notation.

3. THE BASEBALL POSITION VECTOR
  - His running example: a vector p encodes a baseball's
    position as it is thrown from the origin, the (0, 0) point.
    A simulation steps forward through time, a dashed line
    traces the trajectory, and a gray arrow shows p at each
    step. See the draw_trajectory widget in Lecture 4 (notebook
    section "A Physicist Intro to Vectors," slider t).
  - Instead of tracking x and y coordinates separately, the
    location goes into the vector p, and p changes over time as
    the ball travels up and back down to zero.
  - The ball is thrown in two dimensions, so p has two
    components. p_1 is the location in the x direction (the
    horizontal). p_2 is the location in the y direction (the
    vertical), measured as distance from the origin.
  - Example (added): a delivery drone lifts off from its pad at
    (0, 0) and after a few seconds sits 6 meters east and 8
    meters up. Its position vector is p = (6, 8). The first
    component is horizontal distance, the second is height.
    Same structure as the ball, different scene.

4. THE NORM: A VECTOR'S LENGTH
  - The question the norm answers: how far is the ball from
    where it was thrown? The throw started at the origin, so the
    answer is the length of p.
  - KEY TERM: norm: a vector's length, or magnitude, written
    with two sets of vertical bars around the vector (||p||).
    The double bars are an operator, the same way a square-root
    sign is.
  - For a two-dimensional vector: the norm is the square root of
    the sum of the squares of the components. ||p|| equals the
    square root of p_1 squared plus p_2 squared.
  - His emphasis: the norm of a vector is always a number, not a
    vector. It represents length or magnitude.
  - Example (added): the drone at p = (6, 8).
    - Square the components: 6 squared is 36, 8 squared is 64.
    - Add them: 36 + 64 = 100.
    - Square root: ||p|| = 10. The drone is 10 meters from its
      pad, straight-line distance.
  - Why square, add, root (added): squaring gets rid of signs
    (a component of -6 is just as far as +6) and makes the
    contributions add cleanly. The square root undoes the
    squaring so the answer is back in the original units. Meters
    in, meters out.

5. HIGHER DIMENSIONS
  - The ball could be thrown in three-dimensional space instead.
    The norm formula generalizes: add more terms under the
    square root, one for each component. The square root of p_1
    squared plus p_2 squared plus p_3 squared, and so on for as
    many components as the vector has.
  - Example (added): the drone flies to (2, 3, 6), meaning 2
    east, 3 north, 6 up.
    - Squares: 4, 9, 36. Sum: 49. Root: 7.
    - ||p|| = 7 meters from the pad.
  - Example (added): the formula does not care that you cannot
    draw four dimensions. For a four-component vector (1, 2, 2,
    4): squares 1, 4, 4, 16, sum 25, norm 5. The arithmetic is
    identical, the picture is gone. That is the point of having
    a formula.
  - Code (added): NumPy's norm is one call. The hand version is
    shown so you can see it is the same arithmetic.
      import numpy as np
      p = np.array([2,3,6]) ## drone position, meters
      print(np.sqrt(np.sum(p**2))) ## 7.0, square add root
      print(np.linalg.norm(p)) ## 7.0, same thing

6. WHERE THE NORM COMES FROM: PYTHAGORAS
  - His question: where did this equation come from? Answer: it
    is derived from the Pythagorean theorem, which some will
    remember from a trigonometry section on triangles containing
    a right angle.
  - KEY TERM: right triangle: a triangle containing a right
    angle, a 90-degree corner (added definition).
  - KEY TERM: hypotenuse: the longest side of a right triangle,
    the one directly opposite the right angle.
  - The theorem as he states it: for a right triangle with base
    length a and height length b, the hypotenuse c satisfies
    a squared plus b squared equals c squared. Take the square
    root of both sides and you get c equals the square root of
    a squared plus b squared. That looks exactly like the norm
    equation for a two-component vector.
  - Why they are the same thing (added): a vector (p_1, p_2)
    drawn from the origin is the hypotenuse of a right triangle
    whose base runs p_1 along the horizontal axis and whose
    height runs p_2 straight up from there. The axes meet at a
    right angle, so the theorem applies, so the arrow's length
    is the square root of p_1 squared plus p_2 squared. The
    norm is not a new formula. It is Pythagoras with the sides
    renamed.
  - Example (added): the drone at (6, 8) again. Base a = 6
    (along the ground), height b = 8 (straight up), hypotenuse
    c = the arrow from pad to drone. 36 + 64 = 100, c = 10. A
    6-8-10 triangle, which is a 3-4-5 triangle doubled.

7. THE TRIANGLE ON THE BALL'S PATH
  - To drive the point home he reruns the baseball simulation
    with the corresponding right triangle drawn in orange under
    the vector p. See the second draw_trajectory widget in the
    same notebook section, the one that draws the triangle once
    t is above zero.
  - The triangle has base a, height b, and hypotenuse c, where
    c is the side directly across from the right angle. The
    length of c is the square root of a squared plus b squared.
  - For the vector p at the moment he pauses the simulation, a
    is 1.56 and b is 0.6, and plugging those in gives back the
    norm equation from the earlier slide. His closing line: this
    is how the triangle fits into the interpretation.
  - Practical reading (added): any time you compute a norm, you
    are computing the hypotenuse of a triangle you did not
    bother to draw. In three dimensions it is two triangles
    stacked (ground distance first, then height). In more
    dimensions it is more triangles. The formula chains them
    for you.

8. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - A vector is anything with a direction and a length. That is
    the physics definition, and it is the same object as the
    ordered list from Lecture 3.
  - One vector can hold a whole bundle of high-dimensional
    information, position and velocity included.
  - The norm ||p|| is the vector's length. Square every
    component, add, take the square root. The result is a single
    number.
  - More components means more squared terms under the root.
    The formula works in any number of dimensions.
  - The norm formula is the Pythagorean theorem. The vector is
    the hypotenuse, the components are the other two sides.

9. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Physicists love vectors because they encode high-dimensional
    information in one abstraction. Spaceship example: location
    and velocity in a single vector.
  - In physics, a vector is anything that has a direction and a
    length.
  - The baseball vector p has two components: p_1 is the x
    (horizontal) location, p_2 is the y (vertical) location. The
    ball is thrown from the origin (0, 0).
  - Two vertical bars on each side of a vector denote its norm,
    also called its length or magnitude.
  - Two-dimensional norm: square root of the sum of the squares
    of the components.
  - The norm of a vector is always a number.
  - Higher-dimensional norm: add one squared term per component
    under the square root.
  - The norm equation is derived from the Pythagorean theorem:
    a squared plus b squared equals c squared, where c is the
    hypotenuse, the side directly opposite the right angle.
  - In the paused simulation, a was 1.56 and b was 0.6.
