1. WHY THIS MATTERS
  - Backsolving (Gaussian elimination, Lectures 1 and 2) gives exact
    solutions for the unknowns and, along the way, the inverse of
    the matrix. The catch: it only works for specific types of
    matrices. This lecture walks through the restrictions.
  - Three perils are covered. Too few equations. Equations that
    secretly repeat each other. And an assumption baked into the
    whole setup, that each item has one fixed price.
  - Why this lecture matters more than it looks (added explanation):
    in practice you rarely get to choose your matrix. The data
    hands it to you. Knowing in advance which shapes of data break
    the method, and how to tell before you start grinding through
    the arithmetic, is the difference between a solver that works
    and one that silently returns nonsense.

2. PERIL ONE: FEWER EQUATIONS THAN UNKNOWNS
  - Take the three-equation system and ignore the last equation.
    Now there are two equations and three unknowns.
  - Follow the same elimination steps. Where Lecture 1 reached a
    third row holding only p3 and solved it, there is now nothing
    in the third row. You are left holding two equations in p2 and
    p3 and you are stuck.
  - Instead of one unique solution, there are infinitely many. The
    lecture's reason: the second equation defines a plane in
    three-dimensional space (Module 1 showed an example), and any
    point on that plane is a potential solution.
  - The rule the lecture draws: to solve a system of linear
    equations you must have at least as many equations as unknown
    variables. Three unknowns, at least three equations.
  - The geometry in plain terms (added explanation): one linear
    equation in three unknowns is a flat sheet of solutions. Two
    equations pin you to the line where two sheets cross. Three
    equations pin you to the single point where three sheets meet.
    Take one sheet away and the answer goes from a point back to a
    whole line of candidates, which is what "infinite solutions"
    means here.
  - For the coffee shop, drop Faye's receipt and keep Dana's and
    Eli's:

      2p1 +  p2 +  p3 = 15
       p1 + 3p2 + 2p3 = 26

    Any prices with p3 = 4 and p2 = 5 and p1 = 3 work, but so do
    p3 = 9, p2 = 2, p1 = 2 (check: 4 + 2 + 9 = 15 and 2 + 6 + 18 =
    26). Two receipts cannot tell those price lists apart.

3. PERIL TWO: AN EQUATION THAT REPEATS ANOTHER
  - Having three equations is necessary but not enough. You can
    still run into trouble if one equation is a linear combination
    of the other rows.
  - The lecture's case: the third row is exactly double the second
    row. Every purchase quantity is doubled, and since the prices
    are whatever they are and do not change, the total on the right
    side is doubled too. Three equations, three unknowns, and it
    still fails.
  - Using the augmented matrix approach and following the exact
    steps from Lecture 2 (the first two rows are unchanged, so the
    early steps are identical), you eventually arrive at a third
    row with no one left in the third position. There is nothing to
    solve p3 with. In the lecture's words, the p3 solution has
    disappeared.
  - That outcome means M is not invertible. M^-1 does not exist.
  - KEY TERM: linear combination: a row built by scaling other rows
    and adding them. A row that is a linear combination of others
    carries no new information about the unknowns. (added
    definition)
  - KEY TERM: invertible: a matrix for which an inverse exists. A
    matrix with no inverse is called singular. (added definition,
    the lecture uses "not invertible" and "M^-1 does not exist")
  - Why doubling a row adds nothing (added explanation): the second
    equation already says Eli paid 26 for his order. A third
    equation saying "two of Eli's order costs 52" is the same fact
    wearing a bigger coat. You still have only two independent
    facts about three prices, which is Peril One in disguise. The
    danger is that the row count says three, so nothing looks wrong
    until the elimination stalls.
  - For the coffee shop, replace Faye's row with two of Eli's:

      S = [[2, 1, 1],       c = [15, 26, 52]
           [1, 3, 2],
           [2, 6, 4]]

    Run the Lecture 2 steps. After clearing the first column, the
    third row is [0, 5, 3 | -1, 0, 1]. It is exactly twice the new
    second row [0, 5/2, 3/2 | -1/2, 1, 0] on the left half, so
    subtracting 2 R2 from it wipes the entire left half of row 3 to
    zeros. No pivot for p3. Stuck.

4. THE DETERMINANT AS THE INVERTIBILITY TEST
  - You can test for this without running the elimination. Compute
    the determinant of M. For the matrix whose third row is twice
    the second, the determinant is zero.
  - What a zero determinant means, per the lecture: the determinant
    measures the volume of the three-dimensional parallelogram (the
    slanted box) produced when M acts on the unit cube. The course
    covered the two-dimensional version earlier, where the
    determinant is the area of the parallelogram produced when a
    matrix acts on the unit square. Zero volume means the box has
    been flattened. (added explanation, the flattening image)
  - Why flat is fatal: if the box is flattened, multiple points on
    the unit cube map to the same point on the flattened shape. An
    inverse, if it existed, would have to take that shape back to
    the cube. But it cannot know which of the several starting
    points a given output came from. So the inverse does not exist.
  - The rule the lecture states: check whether M is invertible by
    calculating its determinant and confirming it is non-zero.
  - KEY TERM: determinant: a single number computed from a square
    matrix. Geometrically, the factor by which the matrix scales
    area (2D) or volume (3D). Zero means the matrix collapses a
    dimension and has no inverse.
  - The practical read (added explanation): the determinant is a
    cheap pre-flight check. One number, computed before any
    elimination, tells you whether the elimination can finish. The
    denominators in Lecture 2's inverse (thirds, for the coffee
    matrix) come from this number. The determinant of the coffee
    matrix Q is 3. Divide by 3 and you get fractions. Divide by
    zero and you get nothing, which is the same fact seen from the
    arithmetic side.

5. THE RESCUE: MORE EQUATIONS THAN UNKNOWNS
  - Keep the duplicated third row, but bring the original third
    equation back in as a fourth row. Now there are four equations
    and three unknowns, and at least three of them are not linear
    combinations of the others.
  - Follow the full inversion process. The place where the
    three-row version got stuck is no longer a dead end. The
    duplicate row is still unhelpful for finding p3, but the fourth
    row still has a one in the third position, so p3 can be solved.
    Multiply that row by the right values, subtract from the
    remaining rows, and the left half again looks like the identity
    matrix. You can still solve for p3.
  - The point: extra equations do not hurt, as long as enough of
    them are independent. A redundant row just rides along.
  - For the coffee shop, put Faye back as a fourth customer under
    the doubled row:

      R = [[2, 1, 1],       c = [15, 26, 52, 21]
           [1, 3, 2],
           [2, 6, 4],
           [1, 2, 2]]

    Three independent rows (Dana, Eli, Faye) survive, and the
    unique solution [3, 5, 4] comes back.
  - Reading the rescue practically (added explanation): a dataset
    with duplicate rows is not broken. Duplicate rows contribute
    nothing, and the remaining independent rows carry the solution.
    The failure only happens when duplicates leave you with fewer
    independent rows than unknowns. Counting independent rows,
    rather than raw rows, is the real test. (The count of
    independent rows is called the rank of the matrix, a term the
    lecture does not use.)

6. PERIL THREE: THE SINGLE-PRICE ASSUMPTION
  - The entire setup assumes each item has one single price. One
    price per espresso, one price per latte, and that price does
    not change from row to row.
  - In the real world, the shoppers may be at different stores, and
    the price of the same item varies from store to store. The true
    price is then a distribution of prices depending on where each
    person shopped, not a single number.
  - The lecture's verdict: backsolving is too rigid to handle that
    scenario. You would need probabilistic approaches to solve the
    system in that case. Not covered in this module. The course
    returns to it later.
  - What "too rigid" means in practice (added explanation):
    backsolving demands that one price vector explain every receipt
    exactly. With store-to-store variation, no single vector does,
    and the arithmetic returns either a wrong exact answer or no
    answer, with no indication that the model was the problem. The
    later probabilistic tools trade "exactly" for "best fit" and
    report how much variation the fit could not explain.

7. THE THREE CASES IN PYTHON
  - Nothing in this section is from the lecture (added). It is the
    determinant test and the inverse run against the healthy and
    the doubled-row coffee shop matrices, so you can see what the
    failure looks like when a library hits it.

      import numpy as np
      Q = np.array([[2, 1, 1], [1, 3, 2], [1, 2, 2]])
      S = np.array([[2, 1, 1], [1, 3, 2], [2, 6, 4]]) ## row 3 = 2 x row 2

      for name, M in (("Q", Q), ("S", S)):
          print(name, "det =", round(np.linalg.det(M), 10))
          try:
              print(np.linalg.inv(M))
          except np.linalg.LinAlgError as ex:
              print("no inverse:", ex) ## Singular matrix

    Q reports det = 3.0 and prints its inverse. S reports det = 0.0
    and the inverse call raises LinAlgError with the message
    "Singular matrix." That exception is the library's way of
    saying "no pivot for p3."
  - The four-row rescue is not a square matrix, so inv and solve
    (Lecture 4) will not accept it. NumPy's least-squares solver
    will:

      R = np.array([[2, 1, 1], [1, 3, 2], [2, 6, 4], [1, 2, 2]])
      c4 = np.array([15, 26, 52, 21])
      print(np.linalg.lstsq(R, c4, rcond=None)[0].round(10)) ## [3. 5. 4.]

    With three independent rows among the four, it returns the
    exact prices. (lstsq is a tool beyond this lecture, added so the
    rescue can be checked.)
  - Guarding the inverse with try/except is the habit to keep: a
    singular matrix in production data is a data problem, and you
    want the program to say so rather than crash.

8. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Backsolving gives exact answers but only for matrices that meet
    its conditions.
  - Fewer equations than unknowns means infinitely many solutions.
    You need at least as many equations as unknowns.
  - An equation that is a linear combination of others adds no
    information. If it leaves you with too few independent
    equations, elimination stalls and the matrix has no inverse.
  - The determinant is the test: zero means not invertible. It
    measures the volume of the box the matrix makes from the unit
    cube, and zero volume means several inputs collapse onto one
    output.
  - Extra independent equations rescue a system with a redundant
    row. More equations than unknowns is fine.
  - Backsolving assumes one fixed value per unknown. When the true
    value is a distribution, you need probabilistic methods, which
    come later in the course.

9. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Backsolving gives exact solutions but only works for specific
    types of matrices.
  - With two equations and three unknowns, the elimination leaves
    nothing in the third row and you are stuck with two equations.
  - In that case there are infinite possible solutions, because the
    remaining equation defines a plane in three-dimensional space
    and any point on the plane is a solution.
  - To solve a system of linear equations you must have at least
    as many equations as unknown variables.
  - Even with three equations, a problem arises if one equation is
    a linear combination of the other rows. The lecture's example
    makes the third row exactly double the second, with the cost
    on the right side doubled as well.
  - In that case the augmented-matrix approach gets stuck with no
    one in the third position of the third row, so p3 cannot be
    solved. The p3 solution has disappeared.
  - This indicates M is not invertible: M^-1 does not exist.
  - The test is the determinant. The determinant of that matrix is
    zero.
  - A zero determinant means the three-dimensional parallelogram
    produced by M acting on the unit cube has volume zero. In two
    dimensions the determinant is the area of the parallelogram
    from the unit square.
  - Zero volume means multiple points on the unit cube map to the
    same point, so the inverse cannot know which starting point to
    map back to.
  - Check invertibility by calculating the determinant and
    confirming it is non-zero.
  - Adding the original third equation back as a fourth row gives
    four equations and three unknowns with at least three that are
    not linear combinations. The fourth row still has a one in the
    third position, so p3 can be solved and the system is solvable.
  - The setup assumes each item has a single price that does not
    change. If shoppers use different stores, the true price is a
    distribution of prices.
  - Backsolving is too rigid for that case. Probabilistic approaches
    are needed, and they come later in the course, not in this
    module.
