1. WHY THIS MATTERS
  - Lecture 4 ended with Python inverting matrices. This lecture
    shows one place the same inversion does real work: figuring
    out where galaxies actually are when gravity has warped the
    light on its way to us. The professor notes there are a
    bunch of real-world examples of matrix inversion and picks
    this one as a really interesting case.
  - The shape of the problem is the coffee shop problem from the
    rest of the module with the labels swapped. There, a
    quantity matrix acted on unknown prices to produce observed
    receipts, and inverting the matrix recovered the prices.
    Here, a lens matrix acts on unknown source positions to
    produce observed positions of light, and inverting the
    matrix recovers the source. (added explanation)
  - KEY TERM: gravitational lensing: the bending of light from a
    far-off source by a very massive object sitting between the
    source and the observer. (added definition)

2. GENERAL RELATIVITY AND BENT LIGHT
  - The science of gravitational lensing is based on the theory
    of general relativity. In that theory, very massive objects
    (the sun, galaxies, black holes) bend space-time around
    them.
  - In bending space-time, those objects can bend the light
    emitted from far-off galaxies as it passes them.
  - KEY TERM: general relativity: the physics theory in which
    mass curves space-time, and light follows that curvature.
    (added definition)

3. THE TELESCOPE IMAGE
  - See the telescope image at the start of Lecture 5, taken by
    the Hubble or the James Webb space telescope.
  - The lesson it carries: the bright object in the middle is a
    supermassive thing, probably a galaxy or black hole. The
    ring of light around it is not part of that object. It is
    light from another normal-looking galaxy sitting behind the
    massive object, wrapped around the outside of it on its way
    to Earth. The ring is the far galaxy, smeared by gravity.
  - The question the rest of the lecture answers: how do
    physicists correct for the lensing to determine where that
    loop of light is actually coming from.

4. THE SINGULAR ISOTHERMAL SPHERE MODEL
  - In its simplest form the system is represented with a
    singular isothermal sphere model. The professor calls it a
    simplistic model for how light is lensed when gravity is
    involved.
  - The model's pieces: the observed locations of light, and a
    matrix A that represents the effect of the massive object on
    the source of light.
  - The goal stated in the lecture: based on where I observed
    the light to be, plus some information about the black hole
    between me and the source, can I calculate where the light
    is actually coming from.
  - KEY TERM: singular isothermal sphere model: the simplest
    lensing model, in which the massive object's effect on the
    source light is captured by a single matrix A.

5. THE MATRIX A AND WHAT IT ENCODES
  - In the simple model A is a two-by-two matrix. It represents
    two things: how massive the black hole is, and how much
    tidal force the black hole is creating.
  - Tidal forces, per the lecture, are basically twisting the
    light coming from behind the object.
  - Why two-by-two: a position on the sky is two numbers, an x
    and a y. A matrix that takes a two-number position in and
    puts a two-number position out has to be 2x2. (added
    explanation)
  - The relationship: observed positions are A acting on the
    true positions. In the module's notation, observed = A
    times true, the same way receipts = Q times prices. (added
    explanation)
  - KEY TERM: tidal force: the twisting effect of the massive
    object on the light behind it, as the lecture describes it.

6. INVERTING A TO FIND THE SOURCE
  - If you can estimate some details about the black hole, for
    example how big it is, that helps you build A, and then
    calculate the inverse of A.
  - With the inverse of A in hand, act on the observed location
    of light with it and you back out where the light is
    actually coming from.
  - Why the inverse is the right tool: observed = A times true.
    Multiply both sides on the left by A inverse. A inverse
    times A is the identity, so true = A inverse times observed.
    Every observed point in the ring maps back to a point in the
    source galaxy. (added explanation)
  - What goes wrong without a good estimate of the black hole:
    A is built from that estimate, so a wrong mass gives a wrong
    A, a wrong inverse, and a reconstructed galaxy in the wrong
    place or the wrong shape. The physics estimate and the
    linear algebra are two halves of one job. (added
    explanation)

7. THE GITHUB LIBRARY DEMO
  - The professor walks through code from a GitHub library that
    represents light emitted from a galaxy. You can play with it
    yourself, but it is not required for the class.
  - The library provides a galaxy object with adjustable
    properties: how big or small the galaxy is, where it is
    located relative to your vantage point, how oblong it is,
    and its spin. All of these only determine the shape of the
    far-off galaxy.
  - Then a black hole is imagined between you and the galaxy,
    something dense and massive enough to warp the galaxy's
    light on its way to you.
  - The lecture skips most of the calculation details. The core
    idea: if you know some things about the size of the black
    hole, you use that information to rotate and scale the light
    in and out.

8. THE ROTATE FUNCTION AND THE TWO DOT PRODUCTS
  - Two of the steps in the library are just matrix dot
    products. In particular, the rotate function calculates a
    rotation matrix (seen in previous videos of the course) and
    uses it to act on the original x, y points.
  - This happens twice. First the original data is rotated
    based on the size of the black hole. Then it is done a
    second time based on the tidal forces.
  - The professor's summary: all of the effects on the light are
    captured by these two dot products. Take the physics
    describing how the gravity well affects the light behind it,
    represent those effects as rotation matrices, have those
    matrices act on the actual points of light, and you can
    simulate systems like the space telescope image.
  - KEY TERM: rotation matrix: a 2x2 matrix [[cos t, -sin t],
    [sin t, cos t]] that turns a point through angle t about
    the origin when applied as a dot product. (added definition)
  - For example, a 90 degree rotation sends the point (1, 0) to
    (0, 1). Any matrix that "acts on" a point means exactly
    this: matrix dot point gives the moved point. (added
    explanation)

9. THE INTERACTIVE DEMO
  - The interactive example starts with the plain galaxy. Then a
    tiny black hole is placed in the middle of it, between us
    and the galaxy.
  - Moving the black hole around, side to side or up and down,
    visibly warps the light from the galaxy behind it.
  - Growing the black hole: as it gets bigger and bigger it has
    a much more dramatic effect on the background light,
    eventually producing something that looks much more like the
    space telescope image, the ring.
  - Another dimension in the demo is the amount of tidal force,
    which spins the light coming from behind the black hole.
  - Every one of these visual effects is produced by the two dot
    products in the rotate function.

10. A SMALL WORKED PICTURE OF THE IDEA
  - The lecture does not give numbers for A. The block below is
    an illustration of the shape of the calculation only, not
    the singular isothermal sphere model itself. (added
    explanation)
  - The rotate function builds a rotation matrix and applies it
    to a point. A toy lens matrix L then plays the role of A:
    it maps a true source position to an observed one, and its
    inverse maps the observation back.

      import numpy as np

      def rotate(deg, xy): ## rotation matrix acting on a point
          t = np.radians(deg)
          R = np.array([[np.cos(t), -np.sin(t)], [np.sin(t), np.cos(t)]])
          return R @ xy

      print(np.round(rotate(90, np.array([1, 0])), 6)) ## (1,0) -> (0,1)

      L = np.array([[2, 0], [0, 0.5]]) ## toy lens, stretch x, squash y
      src = np.array([1, 2])
      obs = L @ src
      print(obs) ## what the telescope sees
      print(np.linalg.inv(L) @ obs) ## back to the source

    Output:

      [0. 1.]
      [2. 1.]
      [1. 2.]

  - Reading the three lines: the 90 degree rotation moved (1, 0)
    to (0, 1). The lens moved the source point (1, 2) to the
    observed point (2, 1). Inverting the lens and applying it to
    the observation returned (1, 2), the original source. That
    last line is the whole lecture in one operation: known
    observation, known lens, inverse recovers the truth. (added
    explanation)
  - In the real model A is built from the black hole's mass and
    tidal forces rather than picked by hand, and the rotate step
    runs twice. The linear algebra is the same. (added
    explanation)

11. KEY TAKEAWAYS
  - Gravitational lensing is a real-world matrix inversion
    problem.
  - General relativity: massive objects bend space-time and so
    bend the light of galaxies behind them. The ring in the
    telescope image is a background galaxy wrapped around a
    massive foreground object.
  - Simplest model: the singular isothermal sphere. A 2x2 matrix
    A encodes the object's mass and its tidal forces. Observed
    light positions are A acting on the true positions.
  - Estimate the black hole (its size), build A, invert A, apply
    the inverse to the observed light, and you back out where
    the light came from.
  - In the GitHub demo the work is two dot products: a rotation
    matrix applied once for the black hole's size and once for
    its tidal forces.
  - Moving or growing the black hole in the demo warps the
    galaxy's light into a ring. Tidal forces spin it.

12. QUIZ-SAFE FACTS
  - Gravitational lensing is based on the theory of general
    relativity.
  - Very massive objects named in the lecture: the sun,
    galaxies, black holes. They bend space-time and can bend
    light from far-off galaxies.
  - The ring of light in the telescope image is light from a
    galaxy behind the massive object, wrapped around it on its
    way to Earth.
  - The simplest form of the lensing system is the singular
    isothermal sphere model.
  - Matrix A represents the effect of the massive object on the
    source of light. In the simple model A is two-by-two.
  - A encodes how massive the black hole is and how much tidal
    force it creates. Tidal forces twist the light from behind
    the object.
  - Knowing details about the black hole, such as how big it is,
    lets you calculate the inverse of A.
  - The inverse of A acts on the observed location of light to
    back out where the light is actually coming from.
  - The demo code comes from a GitHub library and is not
    required for the class.
  - The galaxy object's adjustable properties: size, position
    relative to the vantage point, how oblong it is, spin.
  - Two of the demo's steps are matrix dot products. The rotate
    function computes a rotation matrix and applies it to the x,
    y points, once for the black hole's size and once for the
    tidal forces.
  - In the interactive demo a bigger black hole has a more
    dramatic effect and eventually produces the telescope ring.
    Tidal forces spin the light.
